---
title: AI-Generated Images
tags: [ai, digital images, art, musings]
categories: [journal]
---

# AI-Generated Images

<!-- make sidebar widget or something with table of contents (one probably exists already) -->

I have been reading a lot about AI-generated images recently and find them fascinating for a number of reasons.

## Interesting Facets

### "Valuable" Parts

In no particular order, one of the things that have been interesting as I have read more about these AI-generated images is how the AI interprets the text given into an image based on what it has "studied" or been trained on. It would be one thing, maybe, to take words like "human face" or "man with pipe" and turn that into an image, which is already amazing. It is another thing to run [a list of famous rappers through as if the were portraits rendered by Renaissance masters](https://twitter.com/Dalle2Pictures/status/1553712736785387526). The quality of those images really is spectacular.

It is also interesting to consider "communication" between the human and AI that results in these renderings. It is arguably not accurate to say the AI "understands" the prompts in the same way a human would. The AI has been trained on copious quantities of data by humans and associated the groupings of pixels that are digital source images with groupings of text that are words. There's a lot to be said about the semantics and semiotics of what the AI understands from the humans. The AI doesn't understand the word "face" any more than "4q3gv" (an arbitrary keyboard-mashing I just "typed"). They are just mappings from the string "face" to image data collected with lots of faces. Then again, you might argue that's how human understanding of concepts work too, but that argument is outside the scope of what I'm talking about here (interesting as it may be).

Related to rendering faces, I find it interesting how much trouble the various AIs have with faces and hands. I can related; drawing or painting faces, hands, and feet are some of the toughest challenges. I think it's because humans place so much value on these things and know them so well. It is difficult to notice nuanced imperfections of a painted sunflower; not so with a human face, the interpretation of which means life or death in some contexts. If a sunflower killed you for looking at it rudely, you would become very sensitive to subtle details therein.

### Communication Issues

These AI-generated images could also reveal something about our assumptions about our communication skills. How much context do we take for granted when relaying ideas? Idioms are a common example, especially for ESL learners, how what is said is not always what is meant. Expressions like "call it a day" or "break a leg" are very common in America but do not translate well when you consider the direct meanings. (They do make for great poetic tools and comedy though. 😅) What kind of communication faults will we accidentally bake into AI or even stumble upon as developers train AI models? In some contexts, like generating arbitrary images, the consequences are trivial, but in others, like self-driving vehicles and image interpretations, it is life and death. There is another interesting analog between what the self-driving AI will be "sensitive" towards relative to what we are; if it might kill us, there *should be* greater sensitivity.

All things considered, these technical innovations will certainly spur research into interesting and often revealing self-reflective questions about human communication and interpretation. Perhaps "computer hermeneutics" will become a new field of study as researchers continue to strain towards improving computer-machine interpretations and comprehension. Alternatively, in a more sci-fi theme, it will improve human⭢computer *and* computer⭢human interactions as AI seeks better communication with humans.

## In The News - AI "Assistance"?

These entertaining musings have been sparked by recent news articels I have stumbled upon.

At a Colorado State Fair art contest, [Jason Allen submitted an image](https://petapixel.com/2022/09/01/ai-generated-artwork-wins-first-place-at-state-fair-enraging-artists/) generated by [the Midjourney project](https://www.midjourney.com/home/). This drew sharp criticism by the other artists because Allen ended up winning the contest. Initial criticism appears broad and vague, only expressing their displeasure with his success. I suspect this is because of a perceived sense of "cheating" or treating the generated image as something he did not do.

I wonder about what other historical technological advances in the realm of art have had similar backlashes. The camera via photography, the computer and digital art or digital imaging, even as far back as the print-making process when copies of an original could be made on a larger scale; all of these, and certainly more, were moments when the art world noticed the power, positive and negative, of some wave-generating technology. I wonder if this is the result of shocked status quo and technology being *avant garde*, which is maybe never accepted the early instances.

I also wonder if there is a parallel or sorts between the age of the masters, like da Vinci, when the greats would teach and train apprentices to do some of their work for them, yet da Vinci still receives the credit for the art work. (<mark># TODO find a reference to nail this down</mark>)

Another fascinating feature recently released (at the time of this writing) has been [DALL-E's "outpainting" feature](https://openai.com/blog/dall-e-introducing-outpainting/), which will generate and append image data to an existing image. This reminds me of an [exquisite corpse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exquisite_corpse) project I did in my undergrad, which I admit was a really fun and interesting collaborative technique. The difference is that the collaboration happening is somewhat between you and the AI, but maybe more the AI and the source data used to train the model.

## The Road Ahead

Debates and discussions on the role of AI-generated images will undoubtedly continue as ethical concerns and technical challenges arise. Problems like deep fakes are already ubiquitous for political, popular, and simple fact-checking reasons. What would it look like for a convincing deep fake of a prominent politician or public figure to have embarrassing, leaked footage of something that never happened? Even if a convincing alibi can be provided, it will surely be used as a weapon against the parties involved. Will biometrics become less secure when a person's iris can be deep faked? What about digital finger prints? The questions, and potential, abounds and only time will reveal what is generated.