# Anger and Sorrow

What is it about a seemingly negative event that pushes a person towards feeling anger vs sorrow? Both are negative emotions in response to something experienced, even if indirectly. So what causes the action-inducing, fire-like emotional response of anger to bubble up instead of the sometimes paralyzing or deflating emotion that is sorrow or sadness? What happens when anger and sorrow are dissected? Can the causes be understood in light of the anatomy, so to speak, of the emotions?

In the interest of concrete examples, let's say Abe purchased a board game he's been looking forward to playing with his friends. The purchase was made online, and the price was set and agreed upon. At the time the transaction was to take place, Abe goes to the meeting place, but the seller backs out of the deal. This will be the concrete scenario to help ground the abstract details of anger and sorrow as emotional responses, but understand the paradigm of the event. A subject expects something to occur, and maybe subject is looking forward to the event. When the expectation is subverted, disappointment sets in, literally, the appointed expectation is missed and felt. These are the components generating anger and/or sorrow. Also note that "sorrow" and "sadness" are being used synonymously.

## Analyzing Anger

When anger is the response, the subject has a broiling internal sensation, like boiling water or a growing fire. Audible grunts of anger or seething silence can manifest. Faces contort to communicate frustration and aggravation. Body language may open up and become more aggressive if the person is preparing to take action, or it may close off and become cold, a la the "cold shoulder," if neglect is the chosen response. 

What about the experience prompts this? Let's turn to our example with Abe's failed transaction. Anger grows in response to the seller's reneging of the deal. This is an understandable response. The sensation of unmet expectations and the anger that comes from it is as common as everyone's childhood where the emotion is frequently experienced. Children often have expectations, independent of how realistic they are, which go unmet; this gives rise to temper tantrums, which in the defense of the raging toddler, are outstandingly difficult to deal with. Even adults have trouble dealing with their anger in similar situations. Children, who have virtually no experience dealing with their anger, are really up against their towering inferno of frustration.

It would seem the anger comes from a sense of injustice. The ever-illusive desire for "fairness" hints at a sense of what ought to happen, even if that expected "rightness" is unfounded. **Anger grows from perceived sleights** and spark a flame that will drive the subject to action. In a relatively perfect world, the emotion should drive the subject to seek out an understanding of what happened and why the subject feels anger, followed by a seeking of resolution. However, anger instead drives further injustice. The tit-for-tat mentality that "you made me upset, so I'll make *sure* you feel upset" sometimes aims to make the other party feel frustration, but also often exacts an emotional tax in the form of added and disproportionate suffering. Thus, every generational feud in the history of mankind. Look at any long-lasting feud between two parties and you can see the manifestation of "the wrath of man" not doing "the righteousness of God," which can easily be understood as "the best possible sequence of actions."

Returning again to the example, Abe had an unmet expectation, i.e., he was disappointed, when the seller backed out of the deal he agreed to. Abe's dreams of playing the desired game and enjoying the time with his friends, some "thing" Abe was expecting to receive, has been ripped away. The happiness Abe felt due was taken away. **Abe feels something was taken from him.** This might cause Abe to become angry. He can then choose to seek resolution by identifying the inciting problem, or he could punch the seller in a fantastic over-reaction. Either way, it would be easy to see how Abe's anger drives him to action. **That's what anger does so very well: it inspires action.** The type of action that comes from anger depends largely on the maturity of the subject, e.g., Abe. 

It's also worth considering how much power the subject/Abe has in the situation. One's reach of power tends to tempt over use or abuse in the pursuit of perceived "justice."

So if perceived sleights carry a sense of unjust loss, what might cause sorrow instead?

