---
external: false
draft: false
title: Sensation: Preliminary Meditations
description: Musings on the meaning of sensation and what senses are.
date: 2024-05-21
---

# Sensation: Preliminary Meditations

What is sensation? What does it mean to "sense" something? What components are involved? I plan to study this in the broadest possible sense (no pun intended) to explore the common uses and what phenomenon they try to describe; then I plan to assess how the common termonology maps to somewhat less common uses and analize how well it transfers.

For example, can the conceptualization of empirical sensation map to moral and/or spirit sensation? What does it mean to sense vision and can the abstracted concepts apply to moral stimuli? What are the "sense organs" involved with moral and spiritual sensation? Are there other forms of sensation that can be discerned using the abstracted terminology/framework?

_Notes:_

- sensation is external data generated by external events
- sense organs are receivers of sense data
  - when sense data interacts with sense organs, the organs are stimulated depending on the level of receptivity to the data (e.g. eyes are sensitive to & receive electromagnetic spectrum radiation in the wavelength range of visible light, but not other forms, e.g. UV, IR, xray, ...)
- sense organs relay sense data (via qualia?) to the subject
  - vision interpreted by the brain [which may transmit somehow to the soul/mind/consciousness, but transmission is only implied if the soul isn't synonymous with the brain]
  - visual data sensed by camera tech and interpreted by a computer or person?
- what are the sense data of morality?
  - morality in this case is a measurement of the rightness of actions taken by moral agents (good/evil actions) or the desirableness of natural events (calm, sunny weather vs destructive hurricane/tornado; dormant volcano vs actively erupting)
- what are the sense data of spirit?
  - God speaks to the individual through the spirit and that information is interpreted in by the soul/mind/consciousness?
  - angles/demons speak to the individual by the same individual's spirit
  - is demonic "speach" data what causes psychotic problems? schitzo, DID, MPD, etc.?
